Chapter 5:  Input and Output
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

A program means very little if it does not take input of some kind from the
program user. Likewise, if there is no form of output from a program then one
may ask why we have a program at all. Input and output operations can define
the user experience and usability of any program. This chapter is all about how
to put information or data into a program, and then how to display it or save
it to a file. This chapter does not discuss working with databases, but rather,
working at a more rudimentary level with files. Throughout this chapter you
will learn such techniques as how to input data for a program via a terminal or
command line, likewise, you will learn how to read input from a file and write
to a file. After reading this chapter, you should know how to persist Python
objects to disk using the pickle module and also how to retrieve objects from
disk and use them.

Input from the Keyboard
=======================

As stated, almost every program takes input from a user in one form or another.
Most basic applications allow for keyboard entry via a terminal or command line
environment. Python makes keyboard input easy, and as with many other
techniques in Python there are more than one way to enable keyboard input. In
this section, we’ll cover each of those different ways to perform this task,
along with a couple of use-cases. In the end you should be able to identify the
most suitable method of performing input and output for your needs.

sys.stdin and raw_input
-----------------------

Making use of std.stdin is by far the most widely used method to read input
from the command line or terminal. This procedure consists of importing the sys
package, then writing a message prompting the user for some input, and lastly
reading the input by making a call to sys.stdin.readln() and assigning the
returned value to a variable. The process looks like the code that is displayed
in Listing 5-1.

*Listing 5-1. Using sys.stdin*
::
    
    # Obtain a value from the command line and store it into a variable
    >>> import sys
    >>> fav_team = sys.stdin.readline()
    Cubs
    >>> sys.stdout.write("My favorite team is: %s" % fav_team)
    My favorite team is: Cubs

You can see that the usage of sys modules is quite easy. However, another
approach to performing this same task is to make use of the raw_input
function. This function uses a more simplistic syntax in order to perform the
same procedure. It basically generates some text on the command line or
terminal, accepts user input, and assigns it to a variable. Let’s take a look
at the same example from above using the raw_input syntax. Note that there is
another function that performs a similar task named the input function.
However, the input function needs to be used with great care as it could be a
potential security risk. The raw_input function always returns content passed
in as a string whereas the input function returns content and evaluates it as
an expression. It is safest to stay away from using input whenever possible.

*Listing 5-2. Using raw_input*
::
    
    # Obtain a value using raw_input and store it into a variable
    >>> fav_team = raw_input("Enter your favorite team: ")
    Enter your favorite team: Cubs

Obtaining Variables from Jython Environment
===========================================

It is possible to retrieve values directly from the Jython environment for use
within your applications. For instance, we can obtain system environment
variables or the strings that have been passed into the command line or
terminal when running the program.

To use environment variable values within your Jython application, simply
import the os module and use it’s environ dictionary to access them. Since this
is a dictionary object, you can obtain a listing of all environment variables
by simply typing os.environ.

*Listing 5-3. Obtaining and Altering System Environment Variables*
::
    
    >>> import os
    >>> os.environ["HOME"]
    '/Users/juneau'
    # Change home directory for the Python session
    >>> os.environ["HOME"] = "/newhome"
    >>> os.environ["HOME"]
    /newhome'

When you are executing a Jython module from the command prompt or terminal, you
can make use of the *sys.argv* list that takes values from the command prompt or
terminal after invoking the Jython module. For instance, if we are interested
in having our program user enter some arguments to be used by the module, they
can simply invoke the module and then type all of the text entries followed by
spaces, using quotes if you wish to pass an argument that contains a space. The
number of arguments can be any size (I’ve never hit an upper bound anyways), so
the possibilities are endless.

*Listing 5-4. Using sys.argv*
::
    
    # sysargv_print.py – Prints all of the arguments provided at the command line
    import sys
    for sysargs in sys.argv:
        print sysargs
    # Usage
    >>> jython sysargv_print.py test test2 "test three"
    sysargv_print.py
    test
    test2
    test three

As you can see, the first entry in sys.argv is the script name, and then each
additional argument provided after the module name is then added to the
sys.argv list. This is quite useful for creating scripts to use for automating
tasks, etc.

File I/O
========

You learned a bit about the File data type in Chapter 2. In that chapter, we
briefly discussed a few of the operations that can be performed using this
type. In this section, we will go into detail on what we can do with a File
object. We’ll start with the basics, and move into more detail. To begin, you
should take a look at Table 5-1 that lists all of the methods available to a
File object and what they do.

*Table 5-1. File Object Methods*

+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|Method         |Description                                                  |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|close()        |Close file                                                   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|fileno()       |Returns integer file descriptor                              |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|flush()        |Used to flush or clear the output buffers and write content  |
|               |to the file                                                  |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|isatty()       |If the file is an interactive terminal, returns 1            |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|next()         |This allows the file to be iterated over. Returns the next   |
|               |line in the file. If no line is found, raises StopIteration  |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|read(x)        |Reads x bytes                                                |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|readline(x)    |Reads single line up to x characters, or entire line if x is |
|               |omitted                                                      |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|readlines(size)|Reads all lines in file into a list. If size > 0, reads that |
|               |number of characters                                         |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|seek()         |Moves cursor to a new position in the file                   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|tell()         |Returns the current position of the cursor                   |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|truncate(size) |Truncates file’s size. Size defaults to current position     |
|               |unless specified                                             |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|write(string)  |Writes a string to the file object                           |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+
|writelines(seq)|Writes all strings contained in a sequence with no separator |
+---------------+-------------------------------------------------------------+


We’ll start by creating a file for use. As discussed in Chapter 2, the
open(filename[, mode]) built-in function creates and opens a specified file in
a particular manner. The mode specifies what mode we will open the file into,
be it read, read-write, and so on.

*Listing 5-5. Creating, Opening, and Writing to a File*
::
    
    >>> my_file = open('mynewfile.txt','w')
    >>> first_string = "This is the first line of text."
    >>> my_file.write(first_string)
    >>> my_file.close()

In this example, the file “mynewfile.txt” did not exist until the open function
was called. If it did exist already, the previous version is overwritten by the
new version and it is now empty. The file was created in write mode and then we
do just that, write a string to the file. Now, it is important to make mention
that the first_string is not actually written to the file until it is closed or
flush() is performed. It is also worth mentioning that if we were to close the
file, reopen it, and perform a subsequent write() operation on the file then
the previous contents of the file would be overwritten by content of the new
write.

Now we’ll step through each of the file functions in an example. The main focus
of this example is to provide you with a place to look for actual working file
I/O code.

*Listing 5-6.*
::
    
    # Write lines to file, flush, and close
    >>> my_file = open('mynewfile.txt','w')
    >>> my_file.write('This is the first line of text.\n')
    >>> my_file.write('This is the second line of text.\n')
    >>> my_file.write('This is the last line of text.\n')
    >>> my_file.flush()  # Optional, really unneccesary if closing the file but useful to clear
    >>>          #buffer
    >>> my_file.close()
    # Open file in read mode
    >>> my_file = open('mynewfile.txt','r')
    >>> my_file.read()
    'This is the first line of text.\nThis is the second line of text.\nThis is the last line of text.\n'
    # If we read again, we get a '' because cursor is at the end of text
    >>> my_file.read()
    ''
    # Seek back to the beginning of file and perform read again
    >>> my_file.seek(0)
    >>> my_file.read()
    'This is the first line of text.This is the second line of text.This is the last line of text.'
    # Seek back to beginning of file and perform readline()
    >>> my_file.seek(0)
    >>> my_file.readline()
    'This is the first line of text.\n'
    >>> my_file.readline()
    'This is the second line of text.\n'
    >>> my_file.readline()
    'This is the last line of text.\n'
    >>> my_file.readline()
    ''
    # Use tell() to display current cursor position
    >>> my_file.tell()
    93L
    >>> my_file.seek(0)
    >>> my_file.tell()
    0L
    # Loop through lines of file
    >>> for line in my_file:
    ...     print line
    ...
    This is the first line of text.
    This is the second line of text.
    This is the last line of text.

There are a handful of read-only attributes that we can use to find out more
information about file objects. For instance, if we are working with a file and
want to see if it is still open or if it has been closed, we could view the
closed attribute on the file to return a boolean stating whether the file is
closed. Table 5-2 lists each of these attributes and what they tell us about a
file object.

*Table 5-2. File Attributes*

+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|Attribute|Description                                                        |
+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|closed   |Returns a boolean to indicate if the file is closed                |
+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|encoding |Returns a string indicating encoding on file                       |
+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|mode     |Returns the I/O mode for a file(i.e., ‘r’, ‘w’, ‘r+,’rb’, etc.)    |
+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|name     |Returns the name of the file                                       |
+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+
|newlines |Returns the newline representation in the file. This keeps track of|
|         |the types of newlines encountered while reading the file. Allows   |
|         |for universal newline support.                                     |
+---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------+


*Listing 5-7. File Attribute Usage*
::
    
    >>> my_file.closed
    False
    >>> my_file.mode
    'r'
    >>> my_file.name
    'mynewfile.txt'

Pickle
======

One of the most popular modules in the Python language is the pickle module.
The goal of this module is basically to allow for the serialization and
persistence of Python objects to disk in file format. A pickled object can be
written to disk using this module, and it can also be read back in and utilized
in object format. Just about any Python object can be persisted using pickle.

To write an object to disk, we call the pickle() function. The object will be
written to file in a format that may be unusable by anything else, but we can
then read that file back into our program and use the object as it was prior to
writing it out. In the following example, we’ll create a Player object and then
persist it to file using pickle. Later, we will read it back into a program and
make use of it. We will make use of the File object when working with the
pickle module.

*Listing 5-8. Write an Object to Disk Using Pickle*
::
    
    >>> import pickle
    >>> class Player(object):
    ...     def __init__(self, first, last, position):
    ...         self.first = first
    ...         self.last = last
    ...         self.position = position
    ...
    >>> player = Player('Josh','Juneau','Forward')
    >>> pickle_file = open('myPlayer','wb')
    >>> pickle.dump(player, pickle_file)
    >>> pickle_file.close()

In the example above, we’ve persisted a Player object to disk using the
dump(object, file) method in the pickle module. Now let’s read the object back
into our program and print it out.

*Listing 5-9. Read and Use a Pickled Object*
::
    
    >>> pickle_file = open('myPlayer','rb')
    >>> player1 = pickle.load(pickle_file)
    >>> pickle_file.close()
    >>> player1.first
    'Josh'
    >>> player1.last, player1.position
    ('Juneau', 'Forward')

Similarly, we read the pickled file back into our program using the load(file)
method. Once read and stored into a variable, we can close the file and work
with the object. If we had to perform a sequence of dump or load tasks, we
could do so one after the other without issue. You should also be aware that
there are different pickle protocols that can be used in order to make pickle
work in different Python environments. The default protocol is 0, but protocols
1 and 2 are also available for use. It is best to stick with the default as it
works well in most situations, but if you run into any trouble using pickle
with binary formats then please give the others a try.

If we had to store objects to disk and reference them at a later time, it may
make sense to use the shelve module which acts like a dictionary for pickled
objects. With the shelve technique, you basically pickle an object and store it
using a string-based key value. You can later retrieve the object by passing
the key to the opened file object. This technique is very similar to a filing
cabinet for our objects in that we can always reference our objects by key
value. Let’s take a look at this technique and see how it works.

*Listing 5-10. Using the Shelve Technique*
::
        
    # Store different player objects
    >>> import shelve
    >>> player1 = Player('Josh','Juneau','forward')
    >>> player2 = Player('Jim','Baker','defense')
    >>> player3 = Player('Frank','Wierzbicki','forward')
    >>> player4 = Player('Leo','Soto','defense')
    >>> player5 = Player('Vic','Ng','center')
    >>> data = shelve.open("players")
    >>> data['player1'] = player1
    >>> data['player2'] = player2
    >>> data['player3'] = player3
    >>> data['player4'] = player4
    >>> data['player5'] = player5
    >>> player_temp = data['player3']
    >>> player_temp.first, player_temp.last, player_temp.position
    ('Frank', 'Wierzbicki', 'forward')
    >>> data.close()

In the scenario above, we used the same Player object that was defined in the
previous examples. We then opened a new shelve and named it “players”, this
shelve actually consists of a set of three files that are written to disk.
These three files can be found on disk named “players.bak”, “players.dat”, and
“players.dir” once the objects were persisted into the shelve and when close()
was called on the object. As you can see, all of the Player objects we’ve
instantiated have all been stored into this shelve unit, but they exist under
different keys. We could have named the keys however we wished, as long as they
were each unique. In the example, we persist five objects and then, at the end,
one of the objects is retrieved and displayed. This is quite a nice technique
to make a small data store.

Output Techniques
=================

We basically covered the print statement in Chapter 2 very briefly when
discussing string formatting. The print statement is by far the most utilized
form of output in most Python programs. Although we covered some basics such as
conversion types and how to format a line of output in Chapter 2, here we will
go into a bit more depth on some different variations of the print statement as
well as other techniques for generating output. There are basically two formats
that can be used with the print statement. We covered the first in Chapter 2,
and it makes use of a string and some conversion types embedded within the
string and preceded by a percent (%) symbol. After the string, we use another
percent(%) symbol followed by a parenthesized list of arguments that will be
substituted in place of the embedded conversion types in our string in order.
Check out the examples of each depicted in the example below.

*Listing 5-11. Output With the Print Statement*
::
    
    # Using the % symbol
    >>> x = 5
    >>> y = 10
    >>> print 'The sum of %d and %d is %d' % (x, y, (x + y))
    The sum of 5 and 10 is 15
    >>> adjective = "awesome"
    >>> print 'Jython programming is %s' % (adjective)
    Jython programming is awesome

You can also format floating-point output using the conversion types that are
embedded in your string. You may specify a number of decimal places you’d like
to print by using a “.# of places” syntax in the embedded conversion type.

*Listing 5-12. Formatting Floating-Point Arithmetic*
::
    
    >>> pi = 3.14
    >>> print 'Here is some formatted floating point arithmetic: %.2f' % (pi + y)  
    Here is some formatted floating point arithmetic: 13.14
    >>> print 'Here is some formatted floating point arithmetic: %.3f' % (pi + y)
    Here is some formatted floating point arithmetic: 13.140

Summary
=======

It goes without saying that Python has its share of input and output
strategies. This chapter covered most of those techniques starting with basic
terminal or command line I/O and then onto file manipulation. We learned how to
make use of the open function for creating, reading, or writing a file. The
command line sys.argv arguments are another way that we can grab input, and
environment variables can also be used from within our programs. Following
those topics, we took a brief look at the pickle module and how it can be used
to persist Python objects to disk. The shelve module is another twist on using
pickle that allows for multiple objects to be indexed and stored within the
same file. Finally, we discussed a couple of techniques for performing output
in our programs.

Although there are some details that were left out as I/O could consume an
entire book, this chapter was a solid starting point into the broad topic of
I/O in Python. As with much of the Python language specifics discussed in this
book, there are many resources available on the web and in book format that
will help you delve deeper into the topics if you wish. A good resource is
Beginning Python: From Novice to Professional by: Magnus Lie Hetland. You may
also wish to look at the Python documentation which can be found at
www.python.org/doc/.
